17-07-2013


Anon
“...the flirty mint green kitten heels were madness at the garden party”


Dave
It’s rather lovely down here - bit scared that Will has gone crazy and will kill us all :( plus he keeps knocking things over.


William
:(
P.S. Kate and Oli are here also and camp has been set up and stuff. Also the stairs to the tent are a bit shit now.


Oli
Brave warriors from the surface have beat the mold into submission sending it back to the darkness.


Kate
Well as you can see we’ve all thoroughly lost the plot. But my, we’ve had a bucket load of fun in true X-ray style. Keep crazy folks!
P.S. Find shit loads of cave as well


18-7-13


Clare - 7.30pm
Great to be back, X-ray’s looking good. Clare and Saber off to push Xanadu. Back by 23.59hrs.


Rhys - 8.25pm
Having just choked back a horrific vitaminski smash combo (in Tim’s defense they do look similar) Tim and I are off to look at Yorkshire. Back by 1am 19/7/13.


19-7-13
Rhys -10:23am
Tim and I had a fantastic pushing trip down Yorkshire, discovering ~80m of large rift which we have called “Curious and Curiouser”. We surveyed ~60m but failed to tie in the last 30m due to our callout. PSS 14 of Curious and Curiouser is where we left it. To find go to Yorkshire PSS 1 and follow rift to left and take sandy passage immediately on the right. Follow to C+C.


Rhys 12:00pm
Clare,Tim, Saber and I are going to Minestrone back by 20/7/13 2am.


20-7-13
Tim 12.40am
Back from Minestrone, killed most of it, possible lead around PSS24 which would require some rope and someone who loves tight squeezes. Ended our killing spree with the discovery of “Hash” along Lost Miles close to Hawaii. Seemingly endless zig zagging crawl upwards. Turned  around due to time. Dangerously low on hot choc now, looking forward to sleep now, destroyed by last two days.


Clare 10.34am
It’s been a lovely first camp for me this year, despite the conspicious lack of 500m of horizontal walking passage. Euphrates is an even bigger shit hole than I remembered - you end up swimming in mud! The (still!) undropped pitch at the end is 10-15m. Rock looks similair to the stuff you get at the top of Cheetah, v. friable a lot of mud. Pitch looks v. muddy. Possible to hand bolt but drill would be easier I think. Saber started bolting but the driver got fucked half way through. Left ~25m of yellow rope at Euphrates pitch.
Yesterday’s trip to Minestrone was a lot of fun. Looked at the little leads going off and Kate’s climb. All became little squeezes with no draught. Except a climb (cairn at base of it) around PSS 21 and PSS 24, which leads to a downward sloping body sized tube which draughts. I went down it a good 5-10m but it seems to go on forever and felt too commiting to do without help/rope.
HASH is a new lead found by Tim on the way back. Around 30-40m down Lost Miles from Hawaii is a climb up on the left hand side. PSS for Hash is at start of climb. Left at draughting body sized crawl as we were short of time.


Left at Hawaii
4 chocs
1 ginger cake
1 honey roast peanuts
1 salted peanuts
100ml meths + fish tin burner + mess tin
Bit of vitamski (enough for 1 brew)
NO TEA
NO SUGAR
15m yellow rope + some short length


Tetley 5.30pm
Smooth journey down with Sam. Good to be back for the 5th year that there’s been a camp at X-ray - like the other X-ray it’s hard to shut down! The camp looks as nice as ever... Off soon to push leads in Milky Way.


Sam
Back down at X-ray. Lovely as ever, it’s strange how more comfortable I fell down here than I did on my first visit last year. The whole procedure of getting/leaving here is much less daunting than before and indeed we are soon off caving having drank tea and eaten smash. I’m looking forward to sleeping all the comf, currently residing behind me, later tonight.


21-7-13


Sam 4.20am
Eating and drinking back at camp at this ungodly hour. I have no idea which train, if any, we are currently riding...Arrived back at camp close to an hour ago after pushing the pitch and consequent rift at the end of Milky Way, which is BEETLE JUICE. My last pushing trip last year had been to Milk Way and myself and Clare had poked our heads over a promising looking pitch under a load of boulders, which has then been rigged and descended with a rift at the bottom which had been left last year. Tetley slightly rerigged the pitch (basically backing up and avoiding the water). At the bottom ther was indeed a rift leading off. This seemed fairly promising and soon came another pitch above which Tetley bolted and rigged a y-hang at the bottom of which...Beetle Juice died :( There was a ‘vertical fault crack’ (thanks Tetley) on either side of the pitch bottom bringing our pushing trip to an end and probavly making us bothe first and last people to ever set foot there. Still, added metres shouldn;t be sniffed at and according to Tetley Beetle Juice might necessitate some slight altering of the survey. Fatigue started to set in towards the end of the night wore on and my patience was definitely pushed whilst descending Apollo, truly the worst thing ever. Plan now is to sleep until who knows when and then go push elsewhere (Atlantis?) later on. We’re not expecting to share camp with anyone else over the course of our stay which is probably a good thing considering out messed up timetable.
Thanks Tetley for a great day (and night...). Though your protestation of me doing the breaking may not be born by my aching body. [Ed - No idea]


Tetley 5.00am
A great day’s caving - my first without glasses! Longer than I bargained for... more aftewr sleep. Listening to one of Clare’s great playlists, full of tea, noodles and smash. Whiskey now and glorious sleep (55 metres surveyed today).


Sam 2.55pm
Just woke up after a great and long nights sleep. Time truly has no meaning down here...


Tetley 4.00pm
It’s amazing that we;re now living in a 25+km long system - the result of 39 years of pushing by JSPDT and 19 years by IC^3/ The Apollo climb was an awesome pitch, I was truly impressed - it’s also now a truly horrible pitch, it should be rerigged if it becomes a ‘trade route’. Writing of connections, a ‘super action’ is going on now to connect Monatip to the system, hopefully this one will prove easier than the M2-Captain K effort that after years of toil, never (to date!) occured!


Tetley 4.35pm
Just listened to ‘Come on Baby Light my Fire’ - while burning toilet paper in the new ‘toilet paper burner’ - a great addition to our facilities!
P.S. Sadly fairy lights not working :( but I like the coat hangers :-)!


Tetley 6.00pm
Morning rituals, ablution etc. completed (including two episodes of Blackadder naturally). Getting changed now to head off to Atlantis.


Sam 6.02pm
Oh man, getting changed will be cold!


22-7-13


Sam 8.40am
Just back from our trip and I am ever so slightly broken...
More Importantly, WE ARE NOT ALONE! Me and Tetley saw a fucking animal at Hawaii. It was some sort of mix between a rat and a squirrel, black with a long fluffy black tail. Something like this. 
[Crude drawing of squirrel rat goes here]
After I sat down I turned my head an it was just there. My first reaction was to ask Tetley “What is THAT?”; his first reaction was to scream as it moved and ran away. I probably watched it for around ten seconds before it dissapeared. Where did it come from to end up at -800m!?! Does this mean there is an entrance somewhere around there. How could it get to where we were; it looked like it was moving well yet was spooked by us. We too were spooked by it. Surely it and more of it’s kind don’t live down here with us? First action when back on the surface is to find out if such a creature exists.
Oh, also, we went and pushed HASH, adding around 25 metres to what Tim et al had surveyed previously. Hash is fucking twatty and does continue beyond what we surveyed. Problem, only Tetley could fit through the squeezed just beyond our last survey leg. It was so close, just my shoulders are slightly too broad..with some tools we could’ve enlarged it but we would have had to gone back through to collect them. Beyond the squeeze, the passage continues upwards into a small chamber, 3m wide, 8m tall with a tight passage continuin off at the top. (all according to Tetley of course). Go push you narrow shouldered people.
P.S. Creature Theories
1. Saber brought it down in a cage and released it
2. It came from outside
3. Tetley and Sam had a mad hallucinogenic trip
4. An alien invasion of Sys Mig
5. A creature to revolutionise all known biology - where does it get its light/food from???
6. Magic
According to Tetley Hawaii is nowhere near the surface. WHAT THE ACTUAL FUCK DID WE SEE!!!


Tetley 9.50am
Firstly before I forget.
HAPPY BIRTHDAY PETE
from Camp X-Ray !!!!
Earlier today I said Mig gives up its secrets slowly but at around 3.40am I saw the creature at Hawaii previously described. I have NO RATIONAL EXPLANATION... IT must have come from outside...but how??????
Hawaii is about 120m east and 750m below the entrance to M16. Now sleep, glorious sleep....


Tetley 6.30pm
Just had diarreah [sic] (can never remember how to spell it). Most unpleasant - also had a similair quick, explosive , wet shit on way back from Atlantis yesterday - well technically today. Used knife to chop up pants into cloth toilet paper! I’m taking imodium and hoping bowels will sort themselves out.


Tetley 7.30pm
Annoyingly I can’t get back to sleep - too many thoughts racing around in my mind - the creature, love, relationships, my digestive system, how thnigs are going up top etc.
Left at top of Beetlejuice 
* 2x20m lengths of 11m, if someone passing through Milk Way, it might be useful - we found a 40m length there - now chopped in two.
Left at Hawaii
* Mess tine
* 4 choc bars
* 2 bags peanuts
* fish tin burner
* 0.5 litres meths
* NO TEA, NO SUGAR, NO VITAMINSKI
Also we left on mysterious creatue.
So our trip yesterday... a smooth journey down to Hawaii. Stuck in Paradise is much much better than when I first went down but still somewhat muddy and loose. Sam’s first trip to this part of the cave. We had vitaminski tea and hot fish sandwiches. Went to push HASH, added 25m (Sam described this earlier). The leas isn’t great but it is still draughting and going. We then went to see the nice stal at Atlantis, very pretty! Back to Hawaii for tea...Sam was ahead of me and as I neared Hawaii said, with I detected a slight anxious tone in his voice, “Tetley, tetley look at this”. I was thinking maybe he was watching a spider or something...I approached and there to my surprise (to put it mildly) was a rat type creature. It moved! I screamed!. What! Why? How? We had some ginger cake (leaving some for the creature), also had some vitaminski tea. Dumbfounded we headed back to camp/ I had the previously mentions explosive shit on ledge after Kamikaze breakthrough point. Also of note, I bought, for £40 or so, a non-Petzl chest jammer a month ago. It’s shit, the rope doesn;t pull though and it’s very hard to open. This is the first and last trip that I will use it. Hope journey out isn’t too frustrating with this crap piece of equipment. Caveat Emptor indeed! Talking of PEtzl, as a boy I read his tales of cave exploration, also the stories of Dent de Crolles, PSM, Gouffre Berger etc. Looking now at the survey of our 25km system (hopefully now 30km+ if Primadoni/Monatip has now connected in) it really is amazing, truly amazing, that we’ve a tale and a cave of similar magnitude!
I’m feeling sleepy again so I’ll spare you my musing on love/relationships...


Tetley 11.58pm
I’ve had, last night and tonight, and woke remembering some very crazy dreams, very rare for me! Maybe its the Ardberg whiskey...What a day!
P.S. it’s still just Sam and me here and we’ve still got 36 hours to our callout...I think more dossing/sleeping is on the cards!


23-7-13


Tetley 4.40am
After 17 hours with only the sound of the stream and Sam’s breathing I felt the need for some tea! Decided to listen to Rum Doodle...the episodes on the player are not in the right order - the correct order is 4,1,2,5,3. We’re low on sugar and have no champagne - lassitude sickness perhaps.


Sam 5.20am
Been at x-ray for an awfully -wrong word- brilliantly long time now. I don;t expect I would have been able to sleep for 17 hours on the surface. 3 days of just Tetley and I (plus our mysterious creature still preoccupying our thoughts) - where have all the cavers gone? Presumably the connection with Monatip/B12/the Bivvy have proven too distracting. Plan is to head out at some point today, as long as we are out for sunset. Before that, food, more sleep, Rum Doodle, Blackadder....good times.


Sam 5.40am
Tet’s gone all philosophical...


Tetley 6.10am
6 billion people on the planet and no-one can have had a weekend like the one Sam and I had! Now eating cheesy, soupy, fishy, smash (classic! with - and highly recommended - fresh onion. More Rum Doodle, Black Adder, sleep now...


Tetley 10.30am
After some more sleep (basically 24 hours in bed with food, tea, cigarette, shitting breaks) we’ve stirred again. Used an old peanut choco and an old Double Decker to make a tasty hot choc in the small pan. I’ve started to think of the surface, the sun, sitting round the bivvy fire etc. We’ve decided against a 3rd days pushing and will certainly be out before sunset. I think the Imodium has worked (touch rock!).
Yet again we’ve discussed the numerous scientific, philosophical and psychological questions posed by our sighting of the creature. 
-What was it?
-How did it get there?
-Did we really see it? (Yes, we both agree)
-Can the scientifically impossible actually occur? (I don’t want to believe this)
-Our mutual reaction to the creature and it’s implications.
-How will the other cavers react?


Tetley 11.35am
The time has come to go...
Final brew on the stove, will soon change into furry. Thanks for the grat company Sam, an unforgettable camp at X-Ray, only 80m surveyed but good caving, good fun, good dossing and a probably once in a lifetime/unique encounter.
Looking forward to a good sesh round the fire, bowels ok. Hope chest jammer not too irksome.
Good caving and pushing to the teams that follow - and I hope you find reading the logbook a good read!


Sam
Starting the inevitable crawl towards the surface...it’ll be good to be back on the top after a long - bvut brilliant- time underground. Cheers Tetley for great caving/dossing. I apologise for my grouchy, grumpy side that seems to come out towards the end of every pushing trip...but camp soon puts things right. Towards the orb!


Tetley 12.55pm
Out now for sun, sunset etc. Two beers await on the surface! Thanks again Sam.


Sam 1.00pm
‘Til next time, X-ray!


24-7-13


Oliver 8.14pm
7 hours of descent later, Saber, Gergely, Peter and I make it to camp. Going underground in the middle of a thunderstorm is something I will not do in a hurry from now on.
Saber and I got on quite well compared to Gergely, who we met at the pitch head of Zimmer. Apparently he and Peter had spent more time waiting for the water to clear than descending.
The water turned on like a jet engine, bringing a noticable draught, Hours passed. Eventually we each donned a makeshift rain coat. My earlier misfortune of finding I had a 6x2 foot polythene ‘Survival bag’ rather than a foil blanket turned to luck as I fashioned a surprisingly effective full body poncho from it. One by one we descended, finding the first two hangs quite dry. We reached x-ray relatively dry and warm, all glad to be there.
No pushing tonight, perhaps an early start tomorrow. Hopefully the caver radio will let us tell the surface we are ok.


Peter 9.57pm [all sic]
This is the first trivial [Ed - could be something else] night in my life. Gergely and I’m waiting one hour under the Concorde because raining in the surface. After, we going, and stop above Zimmer! We waiting again and Oliver and Saber cam. We was waiting 2-3 hours under the survival blanket. At now we’re at Camp X-ray. We’re propane[?] to sleeping.


Gergely 10.25pm
So once again here! A bit wet, a bit cold, but it is still CAMP X-RAY! Plenty of good memories! We had to wait lots hours for coming down at Fistfull of Tolars & top of Zimmer, took our survival bags out and then used them as raincoats on Zimmer! First time I brought down a camera, it is absolutley great. Set up the cave radio, first message “SEND CHAMPAGNE!”. Good old Rum Doodle. No answer from surface yet. Now listening to Dangerous Dick and sipping hot choc, good times! Tomorrow plans are: Yorkshire for Oli, Apollo climb for us. Looking for the CREATURE, but no signs of it anywhere. Good night.


25-7-13


Izi 9.20am
Hahaha...Is good to be back!
With Clare we go to push Brezno Slapov. We push it bit more, was wet as fuck, on the end is a sump, but there are some more leads just before the sump. Clare will explain more.


Clare 8.18pm
Pushed Brezno Slapov with Izi last night, it was a great trip. Dropped a couple of pitches to get to a canyon/rift with a stream, followed it and eventually got to a sump. But taking a left turn down and inlet leads to the base of another wet pitch and a continuation of passage, but is was wet and we didn’t go on.
P.S. NO CREATURE SIGHTING! Izi says “Tetley, you need to change dealer”.


[Insert plan of brezno slapov]


Izi 8.30pm
After a good sleep I woke up quite broken. Today our plan is to go push Let Na Drgui Svet, where Samo fell. With Dalso, Mawr and Clare we have a very nic breakfast (Pasta). OK wish us luck. See you soon, warm bed.
Change of plan, boss lady made plan to go push Xanadu. She want to exorcise her demons.


Gergely 11.30pm
Today we went to APollo climb, to traverse at the top to the unknown kilometres. So, the first half of the plan went perfect, I rigged a school example of a traverse line with 15 bolts, I was so proud of it. Then at the other side, a passage starts! Waited for PEter and then we started...for 10 metres. After it the passage shrinks to an unpassable size and we did not manage to squeeze through. Too bad! So we decided to pick up the rope at the end of Milky Way, then rigged the beginning of Milky Way (handlines) and I tried to rig the Apollo climb properly with a giant double deviation, but it does not quite work yet. There are about 60-70 bolts in Queen’s Bedchamber now!
So the message is:
STILL USE THE OLD ROPE IN QUEEN’S BEDCHAMBER
-there are many lines there now. It needs one more trip to sort it out. So, the top of Apollo climb is killed as well.
Please don’t kill all the leads!
And now Becherrovka time. Good pushing.


26-7-13


Peter 12.06am
I’m only wants a blondie with big boobs and hot blood.


Saber
Yesterday Oli and myself pushed at Curious and Curiouser PSS 1, a short passage leads nito a small chamber with a larger chamber on the right. There is also a short loop of passage on the left and a rift leading straight ahead. We left an arrow pointing down the rift. An obscure crawl (1) also leads off to the right and joins back in later on.
Following the rift, after about 4m a crawl leads off to the right with an arrow pointing down it. This joins back into the rift and there is a climb down and another crawl (2) to the right. The climb leads into the stream at the bottom (only a few cm deep) which can then be followed to a pitch which had not been dropped. Just before the pitch a tight crawl to the left leads to a chamber and another crawl into another chamber (TV Chamber).
Following crawl (2) rather than going down to the stream a junction is soon reached with crawl (1) on the right. Going left at this junction leads to a rift with some leads requiring rope, but the main lead is the pitch previously mentioned.
[insert map of Labrynth]


Dalso, Mawr 9.12pm
[Slovenian]


Dalso, Mawr 9.15pm
[slovenian]


Clare 9.21pm
We were brave till the end.


Rhys 11.21pm
After much faffing and two dinners we are finally getting ready for bed. Dave and I had a 6 hour “push” in which we found a bypass to the Euphrates super grim crawl that pops out in Big Rock. Tomorrow we intend to construct the “Xanadon’t” traverse to access it. I will be drilling and Dave will presumably be complaining.


Sam 11.50pm
After a tiring day of faffing on the surface at 6pm Kate and I finally decided to come underground. Back again! Last year there were around 3 weeks between my 1st and 2nd camping trips; this year 3 days! Smooth trip down; after popping into camp we went off to Roaring and I replaced the 2 hangers with new ones as per Dave’s advice/instruction. Didn’t seem that necessary but job done, a bit more of the system seen and a bit more riggin practice. Tomorrow: pushing Undercover Squirrel, seems fitting after the mysterious creature I discovered last time.
Blackadder and bed.


27-7-13
William 01.03am
Tima and I are off to Yorkshire, ciao. Will be back by nine for a pitiful amount of sleep before rushing out so that I can catch a plane tomorrow.


Kate
Tim and William left camp at 2am and returned at 8am >:(


Sam 9.10am
Broken night’s sleep. I miss the days of being able to sleep for 24 hours in 2 sleeping bags (those days being earlier this week). Anyway, pushing today after some incredibly cheesy noodles.


Kate
I had a dream last night. Was on Mig somewhere and was bit by an adder. I moved around a bit and my hands turned white with the white deadness spreading up my body. I walked to the nearby burger van (?!) and asked for help, to call for medical assistance of some sort. They ignored me and I panicked. Then Pete Hamley came and calmed me and phoned for rescue. A women in a helicopter cam and told me I would be fine and that because it was a small adder I was being silly. I was SAVED!
What does it mean? That I love Pete Hamley? Well I knew that already. I have had recurring dreams in the past of snakes and worms embodying certain men’s penii....But whose was the adder? Rowan Atkinson? Mick Jagger? Discuss...


Anon
Patrick Swayze


Dave
I dreamt about rocks.


Sam
I didn’t dream :(


William 10.00am
Yorkshire was shit so we went to Xanadu instead but we left rigging tape in a tacklesack we decided not to take with us so we didn’t push anything.


Tim 10.10am
Tried to go to Yorkshire but it was too difficult to get a full tacklesack through the twatty squeezes in the wet, felt a bit miserable so decided to go to Xanadu instead. Much nicer, muddy crawl isn’t very bad, got to the pushing front but didn’t push as we were too tired...and also left our tape measure at the entrance. Night trains are hard, looking forward to some sleep before the climb out later today.


William 5.43pm
Getting out of bed is so much harder when there’s no one making your breakfast.


William 7.03pm
It’s ok, we managed to get out of bed at last.


Sam 10.30pm
Me and Kate had a brilliant day of caving today. We went off to check out Undercover Squirrel which had been extended to Rural Underground yesterday. Getting there was smooth going, some of the climbs up US were quite scary but we didn’t die. After lunch at the end of US we had to climb upwards; a climb that I was just able to get up but KAte wanted me to put a rope in before coming up. Armed with some sling material, a maillon, and some rope, incompetently I set up a rope that Kate was able to use. I have no idea which knot I used to tie the sling together (either time; whe trying to cut off the end of the sling, Kate in fact cut through my sling loop), but it vaguely worked. Above this, some time was spent trying to find the way on - through a tight crawl and upwards through boulders until we spotted a PSS that had been left with an arrow to the right indicating “To The Chamber”. We weren’t sure if our defination of a chamber is a universal one as immediatley to the right was soemthing which ‘could’ be described a a chamber perhaps. After thorough examination of all the various holes could find, both to the right and left of the arrow, we decided that RU was probably dead. We were pretty thorough in our examination, particularly in one hole which I had to descend head first on my back and got stuck. Not finding any way on and belieiving that the PSS we had seen could be the last one left by the previous team, we decided to survey the main passage following the PSS, calling it BUM STRAP. My first suggestion after frequently hearing of KAte’s troubles with her newly adjusted harness. INTERVAL We have decided that we are Team Stop, after our mutual passion for the titular descenders RESUMPTION Surveying was smooth, my first time on the book, due to my recently found inability at reading instruments, was good. It seems probably that what we surveyed has already been surveyed by the other teambut as we couldn’t see any PSS’s we thought they might have finished at the junction. Who knows. Getting back didn’t take too long. I had a very near death experience as Kate at one point sent a FUCKING MASSIVE boulder hurtling towards me giving me maybe 2 seconds to dodge it. Luckily I survived as it zoomed past me. Karma seemed to have its way as soon KAte had declared that she had broken her thumb (she probably hasn’t). Cheetah was stupid as usual. We arrived back a little while after Dave and Rhys, food and tea ensued. Talk has turned to Mexicans having sex and eating each other.


Rhys 11.04pm
The Adventures of:
TEAM LOW STANDARDS
starring David Kirkpatrick, Rhys Tyers
Team Low Standards began the day with an ambitious plan to rig to Cuckoo’s nest via Big Rock thereby avoiding Euphrates and earning the pair much praise and glory.
Plan A:
Team LW took the drill to rig a traverse from the second rebelay of Big Rock (only briefly leaving the drill bit behind). This plan was foiled by the drill failing after half a bolt.
Plan B:
Team LW ran back to camp to pick up a driver, determined to hand bolt the traverse. Rhys descended and placed the world’s shittest bolt before deciding that there was nowhere to place another bolt. This only took an hour or so. Dave meanwhile attempted to avoid setting himself on fire with a candle in a survival blanket.
Plan C:
Team LW decided to rig across the top of Big Rock and descend down to the passage, only to find someone had already done this and had left the drill bolts in place.
Plan D:
Team LW used the existing bolts to traverse and descend from there, This was effective. Two heroic bolts later Rhys could see into the passage only to run out of rope.
Plane E:
Team LW returned to camp to pick up the require 5 metres of rope. At this point Dave announced that his foreskin had rolled up and his penis was rubbing on his pants. This was taken into account. The last hang was then dropped and the rope tied to a loosed rock. Finally Team LW put in a hand line down the final climb to Cuckoo’s Nest
Total time: 9 hours
Total attempted bolts: 8
Total Successful bolts: 2
Cups of teas: 3
Runs to camp: 3
Complaints from Dave: 4003
Thrones constructed: 1


28-7-13


Sam 11.30am
Amazingly no cavers came down to turn us out of our beds at 9 so we all had a long night’s sleep. our plan is to head out in a few hours or so, although we are all in a heavy state of lethargy...Me still recovering from my near death experience, Kate berating her bruises....Tomorrow has been set as a dossing comptition.


Kate
My dream last night involved many things but a high point was when Saber took me to a shop that sold discount ice cream at the end of the day. If you bought the ice cream there was a risk it might damage your credit rating. I bought a white chocolate feast for 90p.


Dave
I can’t see the page yday went well sam is shitting [sic]


31-7-13


Tetley 8.00pm
Smooth journey down with Olly, Rhys and Clare. Saw Mike and chris on their way out (bounce trip to Space Odyssey). Clare + Rhys have gone to push Invictus. Olly and I to Xanadu extensions now. Eric and Gregor are here, skinning up before going to bed.


1-8-13


Rhys 6.00am
I am currently sat in a big silver bag in Friendship Gallery with Clare. Today we pushed and killed Invictus. It ends in a very tight rift with a puddle. The 20m of passage is named “RCC Passage of the Year”. We also pushed Hash to a tight chicane crawl thing that is is inadvisable for people bigger than Clare to go down. All in all got about 50m of passage. The silver bag, “Camp Gamma Ray” is very warm grim.


Rhys 8.20am
Camp Gamma Ray is grim and cold and Clare and I are very kind people for persevering and allowing campers to sleep.


Tetley 10.40am
Oli and I went to Cuckoo’s Nest yesterday. Great, Awesome, Heroic traverse at the top of Big Rock (thanks to Dave KP and Rhys the horror of the Xanadu wet crwal is bypassed). Cuckoo’s Nest is also a really impressive discovery. We pushed a draughting lead upstream. Nice cave passage in keyhole shaped rift called TIME BANDITS.
Eventually we got to a chamber with water coming from an aven. No way on. 125m in survey book. Back to X-Ray for tea and mini-sleep. Now for maxi-sleep after MR Choco Hot Chocolate.
Good tunes, good company, life is good...


Clare 7.20pm
(at Tet’s behest)
CREATURE UPDATE: Before pushing Invictus, Rhys and I left a “I’m the biggest” malt loaf on a rock at Hawaii. We returned a few hours later to find it MISSING. Frantic searching revealed that it had been moved under a boulder. A closer inspection of the chocolate dump uncovered three half eaten choc bars with nibbled through plastic. These were previously intact when Izi and I were there a week ago.


Tetley
So, we’re definitely not alone! 


Tetley 7.30pm
Clare, Rhys, Oli and I now all awake, listening to Blackadder...I’ve just realised (thanks to Clare) that shuffle mode is on...so Rum Doodle episodes might acutally be in the correct order (cf entry last week)/


[inset diagram of Xanadu/Cuckoo’s nest]


Tetley 11.40pm
Erik and Gregor returned circa 10.20pm. Ballamory goes! To KOKAIN RUTE! We’re curently all trying to understand/explain the coriolus effect and how what moves when going down a plug hole....
Oli’s cooking, stereo’s playing...Lot’s of laughs.


Erik and Gregor
[Slovenian]


2-8-13


Rhys 3.00pm
MP3 Player cable fix:
[inset drawing]
Setup must be exactly like this and match head must point south. Also it won’t play femal voices. 3.12pm update, it has to face up to work.


Tetley 4.00pm
Great trip to Kokain Rute with Oli. Mafi changed the last bolt on Big Rock which made the journey even better! We rerigged a few pitches on the way down. Kokain Rute is a very nice extension....We dug in Kokain Lab, not very promising. We then drop pitch at end of Kokain Rute - named BINGO GRANNY. Left 60m rope there, a nice undescended pitch and rift lies below. Now sleep!


Gergely 6.00pm
Fratnick, Andreja and Gergely got down and we set off to puch Cocaine. Callout 4am.


3-8-13


Tetley 3.00am
Apologies to Rhys, Clare and Oli....my body was wildly out of control last night....farting, burping, coughing, sneezing, sniffing and probably snoring...I’ve got the lurgy...should be fine getting out the cave though.
Hope Fratnick, Andreja and Gergely are ok down below.


Tetley 4.20am
All four campers, and, dare I say it, friends are awake now - we’ve had tea, peanut-choco hot choc, more tea. Discussing how much work there’s still to do on Migovec.


Rhys 4.25am
Clare and I had a very pleasant trip yesterday. Our intial push was directed to the right Passage of Cuckoo’s NEst stn 17 (see diagram a few pages back). Here we discovered ‘Rejuvenation Rift’, a rift following the water upstream eventually to a chamber where all the water appears from cracks in the ceiling and pools in odd places. Off this was a muddy climb into a rift with several squeezes, one even peaking Clare’s interest because it was so challenging. We left these unpushed and called the area ‘Straight Jacket’. On our way back we hammered open a squeeze off Rejuvenation Rift that was draughting massively. Inside was a medium sized chamber with water coming from a tight rift. There is a possibility of a bypass by climbing up the opposite side of the chamber and traversing the roof though this seemed dodgy so it remains unpushed. 
Our second push was down the noisy pitch (still in Cuckoo’s Nest). A y-hang off a bolt and sling off a hollow sounding rock dropped the ~15m pitch. (There was a rub point so on the way back we added a rebelay). At the bottom a space joins with a streamway rift. Upstream is quickly impassable. Downstream leads to another pitch, now a y-hang. This drops into the rift further. Immediately below the pitch is another ~5m pitch left unpushed but with enough rope to drop it. This pitch is where the water goes. The rift also continues here leading to one dry pitch (~10m) and further on another dry pitch (~15m) that has water noises but we couldn’t see any. That’s where Clare and I finished.
We got about 180m of cave. I also overcam my traumatic Xanadon’t bolting experience and once again enjoy bolting. I also managed to get stuck at the top of a pitch by the end of the tape measure clipped to me which is one of the stupidest ways I’ve been stuck.
Really good trip, thanks Clare.


Oli
Yesterday Tetley and I pushed Kokain Ruta, the recent extension of Balamory. “It’s a bit of a shithole” - Tetley, on Balamory. However Kokain Rute certainly isn’t. Stooping/walking passage, suspiciously similar to Atlantis. We checked a dig in Kokain Lab. Very similar to Minestrone. I suspect this is the other side of the dig there.
Going along the Kokain Ruta we reached the pushing front, a pitch looking out into a wet rift. We (slowly) bolted out. Tetley falling asleep as I bolted. I ended up swinging out into a MASSIVE rift approc 5x50m with a pool at the bottom. Considerable water flow but easy to stay dry. Onwards from this is another pitch continuing the rift.
We attempted to bolt down that, but in a flurry of excitement broke the driver.
In other news I am the first person in 9 years to shit at the Fridge. It’s very pleasant, possibly even better than the shit pit.


Tetley 6.00am
Andreja, Gergely, Fratnick back from Bingo Granny with news of more discoveries....The cave gets bigger and bigger. Oli and I out soon - hopefully sunny up top. Thanks Oli for a great few days....I’ll be back - hopefully without a sore throat.


Gergely 11.00pm
BAckt o another “2-hour-sleeping-session” - we will see how long it will be. Today we had a look at Roaring. The rift would need a good amount of bang - but at least half the draught actually goes upt to a ~10m aven just before the blocked passage. So that would be a good place to climb. Good rock too.
Yesterday we pushed Bingo Granny further, and we found a ~60m pitch at -900. It is big and there is water at the bottom. Surprisingly large sizes, like the Big Rock Candy Mountain. Unfortunatley we ran out of rope so need to go back. The drill also ran out of battery. Sleep mode now.


4-8-13


Gergely 3.30am
Andrej woke up and thus we are soon rready to leave once again. Another great trip, and now up to the sunshine. Maybe I will come back, maybe not...but Camp X-Ray remains the same underground home, a warm place in the middle of the mountain, the place where all of us had so much fun, laughter, experiences, exhaustion and great memories. Thank you, X-Ray!


Sam 4.50pm
The crack team (or team on crack hahaha) of KAte, Sam and Dave KP has arrived. Off to push Xanadu soon.


Sam 11.00pm
Our team was indeed 50% better than a usual pushing team. Throughout this morning our line up was ever changing, yet here we 3 are. We went to push where Clare + Rhys has left off Hydrophobia(?). There were 3 pitches to drop, we headed straight to bolt the last, immediatley ignoring the first pitch for reaons of wetness. Dave competently, nay, heroically put in 2 bolts and descended the end pitch; once on a ledge Kate and I joined him. The was 21m in length however the pitch continued below us. But it was very wet and it did not seem possible to continue downwards from here and also stay dry. Across the pitch it appeared that the other side was drier - very possibly this is where the 2nd undropped pitch comes in and joins the pitch we dropped. Our plan is tomoroow to return and rif the middle pitch and perhaps continue on where Dave left off DWARF PINE PITCH, so called because the dead dwarf pine was lounging around byt the top of the pitch. 3 people pushing is very sociable even if 2 people are spare whilst one bolts. I was the designated sherpa for the day, carrying many metres of rope throughout the cave. Happily, the ‘big black fucker’ and the ‘simon’ were well behaved. KAte made us some excellent food, now bed.


5-8-13


Gergely 8.30am
With Peter we came down for the night train, originally to push Clapton. Due to the lack of time, this plan was soon changed to check the window on Big Rock Candy Mtn. I bolted the traverse w/ the drill but unfortunatley by the time I managed to reach the passage, Peter was completely cold and tired and thus we had to come back to camp. The window opends to a phreatic tube, similar to Friendship Gallery, draught going inwards. The bolts are ok but the rope needs adjustment. Luckil there are only 3 people on the day train so Peter oculd dig into a sleeping bag and onow he is happily snoring. On the other hand in the last 3 hours I cleaned up the dishes, sorted out the metalwork, sanf in Zimmer, smoked a couple of cigarettes and had a small nap on the coils of rope at the beginning of the gallery - all of these quite cold! But now it is only half an hour to go until the warmth of the camp sleeping bags - I will wake everyone up with hot tea and Captain Kangaroo by Rik. Kate and the other will probably check out the unpushed passage and hopefully they come back with 500m of new ccave!
Only 17 minutes until 9, time to start boiling the water :)


Peter 9.15pm
[too difficult to read for now]


Gergely 9.30pm
So here we awake once again. Listending to the My Sunshine, drinking tea, surrounded by fellow cavers and friends, waiting for food to be ready....Good times! Only a trip to the surface remains from the trip and we will be out for sunshine. Another good year, storming leads, the next year is for going down and north, as Fratnik says!
Thanks for everything and have a good last week of pushing!! And, of course, have lots of fun. See you next year.


Anon
Sweetness is goodness!


Kate
Back at camp, fed with recycled slop and luxurious hot chocolate made with real melted chocolate. HAd a superb day caving with chums, Dave and Sam. Things we did: went to find Gergely’s fabled 500m of phreatic passage. Dave descended the traverse rigged by Gergely yesterday in Big Rock. He hilariously came out at the Xanadon’t window which me and Wam Bam then headed to instead. After surveying an intensely muddy 15m crawl which we named ‘500m’ and deciding not to derig Gergely’s traverse (rope can easily be retrieved from Xanadu) we heade back to Hydrophobia. The hole to ‘500m’ can be found at the junction of Xanadon’t and Euphrates in the floor. I can’t be arsed to write about what happened next. All I can say is it was fab and caving in a 3 is by far the most stylish and enjoyable way to do it. Sam is thrusting violently to the music and Peter just did a terrific burp. Out.


Sam 11.00pm
So, we then headed back to Hydrophobia. Thinking that the middle unpushed pitch might provide a dry way into the wetter pitch we descended yesterday. KAte and I put a bolt int at the top of this pitch. I descended reaching the bottom quickly. Below my feet I could see water flowing through a rift - to my right there was no way through the narrow rift. To the left thee was a slightly larger gap that I wriggled through, bloodying my hands and I soon had to remove my helmet - dead. The rope was removed.
For clarity:
-The first pitch you approach in Hydrophobia is still unpushed - very wet
-The second pitch (described above) had been left with a sign declaring it as dead, left by SP 5/8/13.
-The climb in Cuckoo’s Nest is still unpushed.


Dave 11.01pm


After crawling through a river of shit aka ‘500m’ & killing Hyrdophobia pitch #2 we headed back to pitch #3 aka “Dwarf Pine”. Following on from my fantastic bolting yesterday we re-rigged it and descended to the ledge. Since nobody wanted to get wet we tried to put in a traverse to avoid the worst of the water - eventually I fucked the thread on the driver so just decided to descend from my last bolt adding a spectacular 4m of depth & landing in a puddle. 5m or so left to descend from the puddle into the streamway below. Upstream looks dead, downstream may have potential. See awesome diagram over page. Kate was heroically guarding the candle during this riggin sesh. Caving as 3 > pair. Fun times.
[insert diagram]


6-8-13


Sam 12.15pm
Good night;s sleep. I had a dream about the 3 of us (Sam, Kate, Dave KP) plus Saber as a group of travelling magicians. People paid us in buckets of sweets. Saber’s dad appeared as a character, though having never met him I doubt it was a realistic portrayal. Kate listened to Touching the Void this morning and now Dave is attempting to make food.Hopes are high after the previous effort by Kate and myself. We will be headnig out for sunset motivated by Gergely’s promise of gorgeous weather. Though seeing as his prmoised 500m of passage turned out to be 15m of shit I am expecting to return to light rain and clag.
Time is starting to run out but I would like to return for a 4th camping trip before expo’s end. Thanks for good caving Dave and Kate - I appreciated your efforts not to extinguish my life this time.


Dave
Quotes: “Pathetic or prophetic?” - context: he was complaining he was going to die of sunburn on the way out.


Clare 11.00pm
Clare+Maffi off to push Clapton. Callout noon 7/8/13


7-8-13


Clare 9.03pm
[insert diagram]
Exciting night of pushing yesterday. Clapton pitch is a massive space. Effectively like two shafts right next to each other. We drop the shorter one. Couple of leads at the bottom. One has abedding plane squeeze that stopped Maffi, it follows water to a small pitch, might join up with something off the other half of Clapton.
We mainly pushed the other lead, schematic on facing page. It’s still open and going. nfortunatley when we started to survey we discovered a crask in the clino glass. Which is why the tentative passage name is now CRACK SHACK [ed. not on page reads “Renamed PICK YOUR POSION]. There’s also alot of black sandy silt deposition in our passage, plus its in keepeing with the cocaine theme...
Going back today to survey waiting for day trainers to arrive, listening to music, writing this t put off pissing....I really like caving and camping underground...
P.S. none of the leads were killed during this push!!!!


Clare 11.47pm
Rhys + Oli just left to push Yorkshire. Maffi and I will leave for CLapton soon. Dave and Tet not back yet, I wonder what they found...


8-8-13


Tetley 1.10am
Smooth journey down to X-Ray with Dave W. We then went to Atlantis - Dave’s first trip there. Found an interesting passage that ends in a dig/squeeze called “We’re Not Alone”. We saw animal scratch/claw marks on the wall of the passage. Located on left ~80m after Inglorious Bastard’s turn off ~12m before Sandy Crawl. Now back at X-Ray (with Andreja and Chris) for tea, noodles and sleep.


Chris 10.07am
Finally made it to camp, think it took longer from Concorde than to it due to figuring out Skynet, Pink etc. Understoof the mp3 player love instantly. Still planning what to do, over an hour ince Oli and Rhys arrived and CLare and Maffi just brought news of more leads.


Tetley 12.00pm
We (Dave, Chris, Andreja and I) have decided to head out. Last night was thus my last night here this year. Tomorrow is the 12th anniversary of the discovery of Friendship Gallery. It’s amazing how much cave has been found since then. More importantly, the great friendships that have been forged in the five years since we’ve camped here have...(pause for discussion of how to finish this sentence)...er, well it’s been good!!
In particular the JSPDT/ICCC partnership, cooperation, friendshp etc. has grown and grown. May the good times continue!!!
Clearly the cave radio is excellent for rescue, weather, general surface to cave communications (more booze! more toilet paper!) but I can’t help that feeling something special has been lost too, a sense of remoteness and seperation from the upper world.
I really enjoyed caving with Dave W yesterday, good pace, good conversation, especially interesting , as ever, to hear Dave’s observation on the cave. Now out for the surface, hopefully before sunset.


Oli 12.16pm
I don’t want to go to sleep now, would rather resync with the sun.


Clare 5.51pm
Went back to Clapton yesterday to survey what we found the previous trip ~200m added to this years total. There are so many leads there we called it PICK YOUR POISON. Will be dreaming about it now for the next 11 months...
I guess this is now my last few hours in camp. It’s been a great expo of caving for me - many thanks to all my pushing/camping partners: Saber, Izi, Rhys and Maffi for the excellent trips and company. Thanks also to all who have camped at X-Ray for the laughs and great conversation.
Almost can;t believe another expo is drawing to a close...caving-wise I feel thoroughly satiated, but I’ve enjoyed myself so much that I don’t want it to end. Ah well, there’s always next year, and the year after, and the year after....I wonder if I’ll still be here in 10 years?
I should really go to sleep but my body doesn’t want to cooperate....Maybe it’s time to read Tet’s 15 page epic (from earlier in the expo.


Maffi
Still no inspiration, I guess Clare Tan has drained out of me even this, nor only all energy, while trying to figure out how to squeeze through thos passages we’ve found. Anyway it is the last day in X-Ray this year. Wish this refuge was open the whole year. Aja! I want to thank Dave Wilson for the hint on Balamory. He made possible the biggest discover this year! And with this he also gave Erik and me the sensation of pioneers. Thanks Dave! (well this sensation we get every time we push something nice but this one could be compared with findings of Columbus, Marco Polo, Juri Gagarin :) ) Thank you Erik, thank you Clare Tan. Thank you everyone that made Mig adventures possible. Over an out.


9-8-13


Rhys 1.50am
On possibly the last push of the year Oli and I discover “SLinging in the Rain”. It is a continuation of Yorkshire.
We rather optimistically carried a drill and ~100m of rope through Yorkshire, Curious and Curioser and TV Series to find that the pitch Oli “couldn’t see the bottom of” was about 15m high. Oli set about drilling the first bolt. 10 minutes and 1 drill bit later we found out that he had the drill in reverse. I took over and successfully drilled a hole and hammered in the bolt. It was then that I remembered that you leave the nut and hanger on when bolting but I had taken them off. The nut would no longer go on the bolt and It was useless. I the put a sling round a natural instead and descended. I put in the world’s worst deviation on the way down, the only thing holding it in was the tape knot jammed in a crack.
At the bottom we found a second pitch. We spent ages trying to think of a way down. All of the rock was really shit. While we though Oli started pushing big rocks down the pitch. One massive one got stuck hanging over th pitch and Oli spent more time throwing rocks at it until it fell.
[insert drawing]
Eventually we dropped the pitch using naturals we found in a crack in the wall. At the bottom the stream quickly sumps. It was very pretty. I pissed in it twice.
Then we traverse across the top of the second pitch to a window (hand bolting, fuck the drill) finding a sandy crawl that is blocked by two boulders.The crawl continues berond the boulders. Needs some explosives but it goes.
There is a final lead. Through a hole at the top of the second pitch we found a chamber with a potential 5m bolt climb.
[insert diagram].


Rhys 2.30am
Oli is keeping me hostage. I want to go and do something (leave/push) but he wants to sleep. It’s rubbish.


Oli 12.06pm
6 minutes into armageddon on the surface and we are struggling with a tackle  sack that does not fit daren drums. How did it get down here in the first place?


11-8-13


Rhys 11.30am
This year I was the first person in camp and now I am also the last. It seems fitting. I have had a great expo. This year I feel I have moved on from following the competent cavers to leadin myself and developing my own caving style. This has certainly helped keep my obsession with caving alive.
Thanks to Tim, Save, Oli, Sam and Clare for excellent trips. Despite many mishaps and misadventure we had fun and found cave. Thank you X-Ray for being so comfortable. Thank you Mig for providing a bounty of passag (though I’m still waiting on my easy walking 500m).
Till next year.


INVENTORY
Food
* Soup - 20 packets
* smash 5 packets
* noodles 7 packets
* polish soup 3 packets
* midget gems 2 packets
* fruit + nut 1 packet
* couscous 11 packets
* rice 6 packets
* marzipan 2 packets
* Choclate ~10 bars
* cakes 3
* peanuts 4 packets
* fish ~25 tins
* Much alcohol
* some ghee
* some bouillon
* some garlic powder
Items
* 2 full powergas
* 1 slightly used powergas
* 2 pot handles
* 8 flat cells
* pencil sharpener
* 1.5 bog rolls
* 4 litre meths
* 6 lighters
* tent lamp
* 4 aaa bats
* 6 aa bats
* 9 candles
* 600ml hand sanitizer
Gear
* 100m 11mm
* 40m 10mm
* climbing stalk + ladder
* ~30 maillons
* 4 bolting kits
* 15 rawl bolts
* 15 spits + cones
* 20 hangers
* 5 tatty slings
* 4 measuring tapes
* 2 slippers
* 2 hand creams
* 1 ball of string
* matches
* 12 coat hangers
* crubber + steel wool
* rope cleaner
* 6 survey books
* vaseline
* 1 steel brush
* 10 pencils
* wine 200ml